Add ceph monitoring support (#56)
SovereignCloudStack/k8s-observability: docs/iaas.md

performing well. In such cases, you may observe timeouts on the Prometheus server when it tries to fetch OpenStack
metrics. To mitigate this, consider increasing the scrape interval to e.g. 1 minute (`--set "serviceMonitor.scrapeTimeout=1m"`).

#### Grafana dashboards

The Grafana dashboard designed to visualize metrics collected from an OpenStack cloud through the OpenStack exporter
is publicly available at https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/21085. Its source code is located in the
`iaas/dashboards` directory. Feel free to import it to the Grafana via its source or ID.
For automatic integration into the SCS monitoring solution proceed to the next step.

#### Update the SCS monitoring deployment

> This step deploys Grafana dashboard and instruct monitoring stack to add the OpenStack exporter target into the Prometheus configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step deploys the Grafana dashboards and instructs the monitoring stack to add the OpenStack exporter target into the Prometheus configuration:
```

# rook
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rook/rook/master/deploy/charts/rook-ceph-cluster/prometheus/localrules.yaml | \
  yq '{"kube-prometheus-stack": {"additionalPrometheusRulesMap": {"ceph-rook-rules": (. + {"additionalLabels": {"prometheus_rule": "1"}})}}}' > iaas/values-observer-ceph-rules.yaml
```

#### Grafana dashboards

We've tested and could recommend 2 sources of Grafana dashboards that are suitable for both Ceph deployment strategies (ansible and rook):
- [dashboards linked in rook docs](https://rook.io/docs/rook/latest-release/Storage-Configuration/Monitoring/ceph-monitoring/?h=gra#grafana-dashboards)
- [ceph-mixins dashboards](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-mixins/tree/master/dashboards)
  - Built version of ceph-mixins dashboards could be found e.g. [here](https://github.com/ceph/ceph/tree/main/monitoring/ceph-mixin/dashboards_out)

We consider the dashboards created within the Rook project as a solid starting point for Ceph metrics visualization.
If you want to see more detailed dashboards, uncomment and use the ceph-mixin dashboards in the `values-observer-ceph-rook.yaml`
or `values-observer-ceph-ansible.yaml` file. You can use both.

> #### Update the SCS monitoring deployment

Reviewer 2: IMO this update will override `dashboardProviders` from `values-observer-iaas.yaml`. Is it possible to use together ceph and iaas dashboards?

Author: it should be possible to use them together, I will try to define another dashboard providers file for Grafana, e.g. `dashboardprovidersceph.yaml`

Reviewer 2: Thanks.
Then, also `-f iaas/values-observer-iaas.yaml` can be added to the full command

Author: See 11379dcab2c27fb4f7890deb5905d6e32e737582

My intention was not to provide the full command, as IMO this might confuse the reader. IMO we would then need to mention that the prometheus-openstack-exporter should also be deployed etc. 

I would rather keep these things separated, as the reader can deploy both things (OpenStack related, Ceph related) 
step-by-step and then ends with both deployed.  An advanced user can apply the full command you mention, but I would like to keep it simple and bring this full command out-of-scope to this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I agree

- Use the following credentials:
  - username: `admin`
  - password: `pass`

### Ceph

The SCS IaaS reference implementation (OSISM) currently supports two methods for deploying Ceph:
- [ceph-ansible](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-ansible)

> - [rook operator](https://github.com/rook/rook)

Reviewer: this is not yet supported; I don't know the exact timeline when rook will be supported:

https://osism.tech/docs/guides/deploy-guide/services/ceph

This guide covers Ceph cluster monitoring for both deployment methods. While both expose the same metrics via the same
endpoint, there are some differences in Prometheus configuration and alerts.

#### Prometheus metrics and alerts

Ceph contains 2 build-in sources of metrics a.k.a. exporters.

> The Ceph exporter (introduced in Reef release of Ceph) is the main source of Ceph performance metrics. It runs as a

Reviewer: according to the docs this exporter is also available in the quincy ceph release:

https://docs.ceph.com/en/quincy/monitoring/#ceph-metrics

Author: according to the release notes the ceph exporter has been introduced in the Reef release https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/releases/reef/#dashboard

Additionally, I've tested both releases and can confirm that the Quincy Ceph release does not contain that exporter daemon.

Reviewer: well, it's in the complete docs, see the URL, which indicates these are the docs for the quincy release, and they contain the ceph-exporter:

> Performance counters are transformed into standard Prometheus metrics by the Ceph exporter daemon. This daemon runs on every Ceph cluster host and exposes a metrics end point where all the performance counters exposed by all the Ceph daemons running in the host are published in the form of Prometheus metrics.

maybe the docs are just buggy, I didn't investigate.
